# Reflection on the Collaborative Project in the Education Commons

The EC Critical Making project provided a unique opportunity for our group to explore the different fabrication processes available at the Education Commons, especially the laser cutter. Our goal was to utilize the fabrication technology to create a thoughtful visualization of *The Umpire* dataset. Although we were all familiar with the dataset through our previous multimedia essay project, there were decisions to make collaboratively as a group. *What aspect of the dataset do we want to visualize? How do we most effectively visualize the dataset using fabrication technology? How do we add meaning and intentionality in our work?* We aimed to create a meaningful relationship between the dataset and the audience interacting with our project. 

To accomplish this goal, our group first brainstormed ideas for the project. Since it was around the holiday season, we naturally gravitated towards festive themes. Starting with a Thanksgiving table, we progressed towards a more visual representation of a Christmas tree, with each ornament representing when the holiday was mentioned. Then, expanding on our theme of holidays, we decided to create a Community Tree, each layer representing the twelve months of the year. Each layer would have information on the type of holiday and the number of times it was mentioned during the respective month. We focused on the year 1916 since it was the first year Saint Patrick’s Day, a foreign holiday, was mentioned. The nuance of intercultural exchange within the Eastern State Penitentiary was intriguing to explore. We decided to use stickers of representative icons to encapsulate the number of occurrences a holiday was mentioned in a particular month in 1916. Afterwards, we chose our roles according to our personal preferences. Then we worked as a group to decide on a list of holidays to represent on our Community Tree: New Years, St. Patrick’s Day, Easter, Labor Day, Thanksgiving and Christmas. 

Our group synergistically worked to meet the goals of the project. From the beginning, everyone in the group respectfully fulfilled a role they believed best fit their personality and talent. I’m grateful for the collaborative dynamic of the group, and constructive atmosphere that enabled us to comfortably bounce ideas, which eventually led to us deciding on an intriguing topic. Effective communication was key in the process, as we separated into subgroups, one working on the design and physical fabrication of the project (Nicole and I), another working on data analysis (Sukya), and one making the presentation slides (Kristin, Nick, Anaya). As each subgroup made progress, we updated each other on decisions that were made, and questions or errors we caught in another subgroup’s work. The structure of the group enabled us to effectively divide up the work, and to provide objective feedback. Another note I want to make is that every member of the group went above and beyond just their roles to contribute to the project. For instance, everyone stayed behind to help Nicole and I cut out the sticker icons although the role of fabrication was Nicole’s and mine. Overall, I believe our group dynamic was constructive, and assigning different roles to everyone certainly helped divide the work evenly amongst the members. 

Our group was excited and proud of our final product. The goal of the project was met as we were able to comprehensively represent data about the holidays mentioned in the year 1916 of *The Umpire*. The project not only gives insight on when and which holidays were celebrated in the ESP, but also humanizes the inmates. Oftentimes, inmates are seen with colored lenses, recorded only of their crimes and rendered as cold types in datasets such as *The Umpire*. This project reminds audiences that inmates are humans as well. Although they were incarcerated for reasons, they excitedly anticipated and celebrated holidays just like everyone else. We hope the commonality of celebrating holidays induces a sense of empathy and connection between the inmate’s experience and the audience. I believe our goal of building a meaningful physical project that builds connection with the audience was successfully fulfilled. 

Although I was proud of our group’s project, there is one aspect I wish we had more time to improve on: intractability of the project. Although the Community Tree enables the audience to interact with the physical model by touching it and looking at it from different angles, the number of ways of interaction is limited. I wish we could have included an additional aspect to the tree that better highlights the represented dataset by adding a QR code on top of a tree. The QR code will lead to a website where the Community Tree is rendered in 3D, and the audience can interact with the different layers of the tree, discovering aspects of the project that could have been difficult to see due to the layers.

In fact, as the Fabricator of the group, Nicole and I worked together to design, laser cut, and assemble the physical model. I initially sketched out the conceptual design for the project on the iPad, which we translated over to Adobe Illustrator 2024. Since we both did not have personal access to Adobe Illustrator, we used a computer at Education Commons to create a design sheet for the laser printer. Then, with help from Lexi, we were successfully able to laser cut and assemble the twelve layers and stickers together into a comprehensive final product. 

Overall, I believe our project successfully captures the attention of the audience, and encapsulates not only the informational aspect of the dataset, but also enables the audience to build a connection with those incarcerated over the shared celebration of holidays. I personally enjoyed this project, especially working hands-on and learning about the 3D printing process and laser cutting, along with their various applications from digital humanities to medicine. Once again, I am grateful for the opportunity to take part in a wonderful team and for all the help we received from the staff at Education Commons: Christine, Tex, Lexi, and Noah. 

